docs: wip-4 signature aggregation (#23)
witnet/WIPs: wip-0004.md

However, ensuring the availability of the block headers in the target chain is not that straightforward, specially for non-PoW chains. PoW achieves probabilistic finality thanks to the difficulty of reverting a chain with sufficient work on it, a difficulty that is publicly verifiable. In order to validate new block headers from chains whose consensus relies on a BFT algorithm that is based on an intra-chain metric (stake, reputation) the target chain needs to know the previous state of such metrics in the source chain. In the particular case of Witnet, the consensus is dependent on the reputation that node holds, a metric that quantifies the honest participation (i.e., agreeing with the majority) of the nodes in previous data requests. These nodes will be part of a group of members called the Active Reputation Set (ARS). Under BFT assumptions we can expect 2/3 of such nodes to be honest, and therefore a block header validity will likely depend on the ability to demonstrate that those 2/3 agree on a specific value.

> The scope of this document is to propose a solution for an efficient verification of the signatures of the ARS members in a smart contract platform like ethereum. BLS signatures allow us to aggregate signatures provided by the ARS and provide an aggregated signature to a smart contract that can be validated with a single verification. Undoubtedly, such signature and aggregation might have severe consequences in the Witnet chain in terms of efficiency and latency. The following sections propose a solution that minimizes both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scope of this document is to propose a solution for an efficient verification of the signatures of the ARS members in a smart contract platform like ethereum. BLS signatures allow us to collect signatures of the ARS members and provide an aggregated signature to a smart contract that can be validated with a single verification. Undoubtedly, such signature and aggregation might have severe consequences in the Witnet chain in terms of efficiency and latency. The following sections propose a solution that minimizes both.
```

## Proposal 

### Actors in the system

This section describes the different actors that will take part on the protocol:

> - **ARS members**: Members who recently participated in the Witnet protocol and that are representative of the current reputation distribution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **ARS members**: Nodes who recently participated in the Witnet protocol and that are representative of the current reputation distribution.
```

- **Disenfranchised nodes**: Nodes who have participated at some point in the Witnet protocol but that are no longer active.

- **Bridge nodes**: Nodes that are in charge of relaying information from Witnet to Ethereum and viceversa. They do not necessarily to actively participate in the Witnet protocol.

### The protocol

This section defines the responsabilities that each of the aforementioned will have in the protocol.

#### Checkpoint based ARS member voting

> As already mentioned before, the ARS is a representation of the current reputation distribution in Witnet. Therefore we can expect at least 2/3s of such group to honestly report the current tip of the *Witnet chain*. However, voting for the tip of the chain in every single epoch might incur in non-affordable computational costs. Therefore, we propose to vote at specific chetheckpoints, i.e., every time *epoch mod checkpoint = 0*. Note that the vote should include information about all the block headers that were consolidated in the last *checkpoint* epochs. We will refer to the vote emitted every *checkpoint* as a **superblock**. Currently a block header in Witnet looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As already mentioned before, the ARS is a representation of the current reputation distribution in Witnet. Therefore we can expect at least 2/3s of such group to honestly report the current tip of the *Witnet chain*. However, voting for the tip of the chain in every single epoch might incur in non-affordable computational costs. Therefore, the proposal is to vote at specific checkpoints, i.e., every time *epoch mod checkpoint = 0*. Note that the vote should include information about all the block headers that were consolidated since last *checkpoint*. We will refer to the vote emitted every *checkpoint* as a **superblock**.
Currently a block header in Witnet looks like:
```

                            Block Header

    Data request root       Tally root     Rest of the transactions root 

> In order to construct a **superblock**, we propose the following schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to construct a **superblock**, the following schema is proposed:
```

> - Nodes compute an ordered merkle root of all block all data request roots that were consolidated in the last *checkpoint* epochs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Nodes compute an ordered merkle root of all block's data request roots that were consolidated in the last *checkpoint* epochs.
```

> - Nodes compute an ordered merkle root of all block all tally roots that were consolidated in the last *checkpoint* epochs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Nodes compute an ordered merkle root of all block tally roots that were consolidated in the last *checkpoint* epochs.
```

- Nodes compute a merkle tree with the ARS snapshot at the time of proposing the superblock. This will be ordered by their public keys.

```

                                          Superblock

        superblock_dr_root            superblock_tally_root               ARS_root

      dr_root1       dr_root2       tally_root1       tally_root2     pk1          pk2 

```

Note that verifying data request and tally transactions becomes as simple as providing the valid merkle path to the superblock_dr_root/superblock_tally_root transactions. Identically, proving the membership to the ARS is achieved by again providing a valid merkle path to the ARS_root.

**Specification**

The message to be hashed and signed by the ARS members could look something like this:

```rust
struct Superblock {
    struct BlockHeader {
        struct BlockMerkleRoots {
            dr_hash_merkle_root: Hash,      
            tally_hash_merkle_root: Hash,
            ars_merkle_root: Hash
        }
        superblock_beacon: CheckpointBeacon;
    }
}
```

> where *dr_hash_merkle_root* and *tally_hash_merkle_root* are the merkle roots with all dr/tally roots from all blocks that occurred in the last *checkpoints. *ars_merkle_root* refers to the merkle root of the ARS members at the current checkpoint, and *superblock_beacon* refers to the index and the hash of the previous superblock.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where *dr_hash_merkle_root* and *tally_hash_merkle_root* are the merkle roots with all dr/tally roots from all blocks that occurred in the last *checkpoints*. *ars_merkle_root* refers to the merkle root of the ARS members at the current checkpoint, and *superblock_beacon* refers to the index and the hash of the previous superblock.
```

The message to be transmitted will be the signature of the hash of the aforementiond superblock:

```rust
message SuperblockVote {
    KeyedSignature superblock_sig = 1;
}
```

#### Signature aggregation
The aggregation can happen at two different stages in the protocol:

> 1. The ARS members append their signature to an aggregated signature they receive. The drawback of this option is that ARS members should verify the aggregated signatures to prevent from aggregating their own signature to an invalid set of signatures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The ARS members append their signature to an aggregated signature they receive. The drawback of this option is that ARS members should verify the aggregated signatures to prevent from adding their own signature to an invalid set of signatures.
```

2. The ARS members just transmit their vote and relay every other ARS members vote. The aggregation this time is in charge of the bridge node, who can easily discard invalid signatures. The drawback of this option is that if the ARS becomes big enough it might flood the network.

<img src="WIP-0004/sig_aggregation.jpeg"></img>

The proposal implements option 2 due to its similarity with the current way of transmitting blocks every epoch. The mitigations for the potential flooding the network might suffer are still open to discussion and are out of scope for this proposal.

> The bridge node in this case will construct the message for the Block Relay. First it will ask the Witnet node it is connected to for the current superblock and the amount of votes it received. Next, it will aggregate those votes into a single aggreated signature. It will also create a merkle proof demonstrating the belonging of each of the voters to the previous superblock ARS. This message will be transmitted to the block relay, which sould verify the merkle proof and implement the GRANDPA protocol.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bridge node in this case will construct the message for the Block Relay. First it will ask the Witnet node it is connected to for the current superblock and the amount of votes it received. Next, it will aggregate those votes into a single aggreated signature. It will also create a merkle proof demonstrating the belonging of each of the voters to the previous superblock ARS. This message will be transmitted to the block relay, which should verify the merkle proof and implement the GRANDPA protocol, which implementation will be discussed and presented in another Witnet improval proposal .
```

The message to be constructed for the block relay thus will have the following structure:

```rust
message BlockRelayMessage {
    struct Superblock;
    BlsSig aggregated_signature;
    BlsPubKey[] voters;
    Hash[] merkle_path;
}
```

It is out of the scope of this proposal how an efficient merkle can be computed. However, we can expect not to provide one merkle path per voter to verify, as they all belong to the same merkle tree and can re-use hashes.

> In order to achiveve proper finality in the block relay, ARS members should only cast one vote pero checkpoint. Clearly we can not have two superblocks being voted by the same node. However, we have not discussed any penalization mechanisms at this point, thus nothing prevents them for doing so. For the moment, a Witnet node could just take one of the votes of such a double-voter. Identically, the Block Relay should store the index of the voters that have already voted sould be stored. If another bridge node claims to have another vote from the same voter, the bridge node should discard such vote.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to achiveve proper finality in the block relay, ARS members should only cast one vote per checkpoint. Clearly there can not be two superblocks being voted by the same node. However, no penalization mechanisms has been discussed at this point, thus nothing prevents them for doing so. For the moment, a Witnet node could just take one of the votes of such a double-voter. Identically, the Block Relay should store the index of the voters that have already voted should be stored. If another bridge node claims to have another vote from the same voter, the bridge node should discard such vote.
```

#### BLS associated ARS merkle root

> As proposed in Draft [WIP-0003], each of the Witnet nodes should store a mapping where they hold the BLS keys. In this sense, everytime a superblock is created nodes should take this mapping a construct a merkle tree with the ARS members ordered, from left to right, by their reputation score. In the figure below, pk<sub>i</sub> refers the BLS public key of node at position $i$ in a reputation based ranking of the ARS members.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As proposed in Draft [WIP-0003], each of the Witnet nodes should store a mapping where they hold the BLS keys. In this sense, everytime a superblock is created nodes should take this mapping and construct a merkle tree with the ARS members ordered, from left to right, by their reputation score. In the figure below, pk<sub>i</sub> refers the BLS public key of node at position $i$ in a reputation based ranking of the ARS members.
```
